# Empire of Pain

The opioid epidemic has been raging now for more than a decade, and Empire of Pain delves deep into one possible cause of this epidemic: the conduct of Purdue Pharmaceuticals and of the Sackler family that owns Purdue.

Empire of Pain starts in the 50s and with the exploits of Arthur Sackler and his brothers. Arthur set up a widely successful company that specialised in medical marketing. This company worked together with Roche to market Valium, and Arthur made a fortune from this, since his compensation was based on the sales volume of Valium.

Interestingly, just like OxyContin, the chief opioid painkiller sold by Purdue, Valium is also a psychoactive drug, that alters the state of our mind. Like OxyContin, Valium was being marketed as having virtually no side effects while vastly overpromising its effectiveness and range of uses.

OxyContin is based on an synthetic opioid that is derived from the poppy flower; interestingly, most of these employed for medical use do not stem from Afghanistan but from Tasmania, Australia. OxyContin was promised to be a safer alternative to morphine and other opioid painkillers, and also as being milder; although in truth the active ingredient, oxycodone is stronger than morphine. Without surprise, things ended in disaster, with scores of people becoming addicted and dying from overdoses.

What I find interesting to consider here seems to be our inability to learn from history. Not only did the marketing and abuse of Valium give a good indication of what would come of OxyContin eventually, but there is another opioid drug that was also promised to be highly effective, yet turned out to be extremely dangerous; heroin, which was created by the pharmaceutical giant Bayer.

Another fascinating point in the book is the dysfunction of US institutions and how easy they are compromised by corruption or political influencing. Chief culprit here is the F.D.A., which was instrumental by first approving OxyContin as a medicine but also enabling Purdue's marketing by allow them to make largely unsubstantiated claims (such that OxyContin is a milder and less addictive painkiller). Moreover, long after the abuse of OxyContin and other painkillers became to difficult to ignore, both federal and state prosecutors would start raising cases against Purdue Pharmaceuticals and the Sackler family. The book describes in great detail how these cases and related investigations were derailed by political influence from both the Bush (Jr) and Trump administrations.

The U.S. is often seen as a leader in regulation, especially in the medical field. Empire of Pain provides ample evidence that other countries are well advised to take the findings of the F.D.A. with a grain of salt.

Lastly, Empire of Pain also provides a nice perspective on capitalism. In a way, the Sackler family and in particular Arthur and later Richard would make for excellent addition to the roster of capitalist heroes of <a href="https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/4191005091">Atlas Shrugged</a>. They work very hard, and they build gigantic businesses. They are not driven by malice per se, but they lack perspective that they maybe creating more harm than good (with the good being to provide patients in pain relief). But harm they do, and the more money they make, the more harm they are causing.

The Sacklers were also very prominent philanthropists, who would donate generously to museums, art galleries and universities. They seems to have a proclivity to have their name attached to things, such as the Sackler Gallery, Sackler Museum, Sackler School of ... etc. Notwithstanding that however, they did give away their money to causes they believed in. To me, that though is less exonerating than another cause for concern. Individuals should not be in the position to donate millions, tens of millions, or even billions to charitable causes they believe in. Sums of such magnitude should be distributed by democratic institutions that are transparent and accountable, and allocate resources in the interest of the people.

It shines through in every sentence that Empire of Pain is meticulously researched, and while it certainly does not show the Sackler family in a very favourable way, that is very understandable given the facts laid out. I think it shows an important history from which plenty can be learned; if we so chose.
