

As undeniably good exercise is for our health and mind, I sometimes feel it is a bit of a bane of my existence. So many hours that must be spent on something that I don't particularly enjoy. Exercised discusses exercise both as a social phenomenon (what is exercise in different societies) and from a biological perspective (what does it do to our bodies). 

Particular focus is on pre-agricultural societies, where, interestingly, the concept of exercise does not exist for the most part. It also does not seem to be required, with everyone being fit and slim, probably on account of a better diet and a more active lifestyle.

For someone like me who doesn't particularly like exercise there are a lot of bad news in Exercised. Not only does more exercise always seem better for us, it also seems to be beneficial to do all different kinds of exercise; endurance, power and strength training; with endurance training being the most important of these. For some good news, it seems it is never too late to start exercising.

One of the key mysteries Exercised aims to solve is why it is so healthy for us to exercise, if this is something that is not natural to humans at all. Exercise is by definition an activity in which we exert energy for no other purpose but to be physically active. I don't think we get a complete answer here, but it appears that exercise is maybe a compensation for the dramatic lack of physical activity in modern societies. Many processes in our body are built around us moving about, carrying, collecting and eating much less energy-dense food than we normally do. Thus when observing a tribe of hunter gatherers, we see no evidence of exercise but still plenty of physical activity, resulting in most members of the tribe enjoying good health, especially in relation to the cardiovascular system.

Exercised thus advises that there is not really one right way to exercise but, in general, it is just important for us to be physically active. Lieberman advises that the best exercise is the one that we enjoy, so that we do more of it, with the corollary that as mentioned above, it is the most beneficial for us to do exercise for strength, power and endurance if we can.

Overall I think there is lots of interesting knowledge in Exercised and there is plenty to be learned here. I think the information presented just feels a bit fragmented at times due to the organisation of the book, with each chapter dedicated to debunking a popular myth of exercise; which I find is often not very successful and instead often concluding more or less with the insight that there is a lot of truth to the myth. As I have argued, knowledge is an important ingredient for helping us adopt more beneficial behaviours and I think Exercised is a good source of knowledge and additional motivation to get into or expand our exercise habits.
