What has the moon ever done to us? In popular culture, it seems at the moment as if it becomes a favourite target of destruction (as New York often has been). N.K. Jemisin's excellent [Broken Earth series](https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2118310109) is based on the moon disappearing and likewise it got destroyed in the Netflix show the Umbrella Academy recently. In Seveneves the moon is likewise not for long and gets destroyed by a mysterious force.

What I really liked about Seveneves is that it somewhat breaks with usual tropes of stories that involve a cosmic calamity. An alien force invades earth? A meteorite is posed to strike earth? Usually through hardships and luck, the protagonists of the story manage to avoid disaster. Not so in Seveneves. The moon gets broken up into pieces - and three years later, human civilisation is wiped out on earth by the debris of the moon.

A lucky few humans escape onto a space station - but as things go, humans turn out to be their own worse enemy. So, as if wiping out billions on the planet surface wasn't enough, political disagreements result in the death of almost everyone on mankind's fledging spacebound habitats. Almost everyone that is, with the exception of seven women, who become the titular seven eves and fund a new human civilisation in Earth's orbit.

However, the seven eves use genetical engineering to fashion their own offspring and each seed a breed of humans that form their own societies. These again do not get along. A few thousand years pass by, and as Earth becomes habitable again, tensions between the different breeds of humans escalate over the control of earth. What's more, there are humans who have survived in deep underground bunkers, and who likewise are not too happy to meet others of their species and share the Earth with them.

I think in terms of composition of the story, there are some really interesting ideas here. Chiefly in terms of scale of both time and impact for humanity as a whole; reminding me of [Cloud Atlas](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/49628.Cloud_Atlas) by David Mitchell, a book I really enjoyed. Woven through all of this is a steadfast dedication to hard science fiction expressed in long discussions of orbital mechanics and other aspects of building a civilisation in space.

I think though that sometimes the book seems to be a bit pessimistic in its view on humanity. Humans are more often than portrayed as being their own worst enemy. Such as seeking power at the expense of everyone's well being. There are some particular populist leaders in the second part of the book (Julia the former US president), who are probably inspired by some contemporary politicians, who do not seem to consider the common good at all, and it is really doubtful why anyone would follow them at all. But then, it is the same for some contemporary leaders.

I have recently read the book [Blueprint by Nicholas A. Christakis](https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/4027613442) and in some ways it is an interesting companion to Seveneves; Blueprint also discusses how human civilisations are formed, and specifically at some length how they are formed under specific circumstances such as after a shipwreck or isolated at the Antarctic research station. An interesting finding from looking at these societies was that whether they turn out to be beneficial to their members was what leadership they had and also how many resources they have available. In general, selfless, fair and respected leaders made for healthy groups, as did the general availability of enough resources to sustain the group. So in Seveneves case, for both the first and second part of the book (first part are the three years leading up to the destruction of earth, and second part is about the survivors in space who manage to almost kill themselves) these factors were not given which provides a good explanation for things going to poorly. However, I do not think that it is in human nature to do so. Generally we are very good at cooperating and pulling ourselves together in the face of hardship to accomplish a greater good. For a very sound argument on our collective accomplishments in the past centuries, I recommend [Enlightenment Now: The Case for Reason, Science, Humanism, and Progress](https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2714425740) by Steven Pinker. 

Overall I quite enjoyed Seveneves even though there was a bit too much orbital mechanics in it for my liking - but I do admire the ambition of the storytelling and think it provides some interesting material for thought what societies we should or should not build.
