Many books are written about the most momentous events in history and about the people most famous in their day. However, as The Invention of Nature shows, the fame of even the most well-known international celebrities can fade, as has happened in the case of Alexander from Humboldt. The Doctors Blackwell explores the lives of Elizabeth and ... Blackwell, who achieved some notoriety in their day but overall made their impact on a more modest scale than others. To me, that is one of the greatest strength of this book, in that it follows the lives of those that make extraordinary contributions but did so without the extreme altercations of fame and power; thus giving a more applicable guide for most of us normal beings.

Elizabeth was the first woman in the United States that got admitted as a doctor of medicine, and I think through that accomplishment some important factors for success can be seen. First of all, Elizabeth was driven by a very strong purpose. She really, really wanted to become a medical doctors, one with equal education provided to male doctors. She doggedly pursued this goal over many years, notwithstanding the setbacks. She was also smart and very hardworking. Lastly, she was also afforded an upbringing in a privileged class with very good family connection, which allowed her long stretches of time in which she would not have to work for an income. It is very heartening that nowadays there are much less obstacles from anyone of any gender to pursue the medical profession, though I think that some elements of what enabled Elizabeth's success are still required to this day.

What is also quite interesting in The Doctors Blackwell is that Elizabeth is often portrayed as straying a bit from a fully virtuous past. Especially she is shown to not really care very deeply about patients, apart from seeing them as interesting case studies to be learned from. She is also not very sympathetic to the women's rights movement, often faulting women for getting themselves into the position they find themselves in. Notwithstanding these attitudes, Elizabeth could still make a very positive contribution, both in terms of being the first woman admitted for a medical degree, but maybe even more importantly in establishing a clinic in New York in the intention to make it easier for other female doctors to gain practical experience.

