To me, one of the most beautiful aspects of reading is that books can be the portal to aspects of the world and its history that are very unfamiliar to us. Unfortunately, a book that can teach us something new must not necessarily be easy or interesting to read. The Art of Memory definitely falls into this category for me; there was plenty to be learned for me but oftentimes reading was a very trying experience.

Some key things I've learned:

- I got a new understanding of the nature of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. For the former, The Art of Memory really got me an appreciation of how very ingrained religion was into every aspect of life. Instead of using mnemonic techniques to remember speeches, they were used to remember the virtue and vices of Christian teachings. They were further needlessly complicated and made more obscure. I always had a quite positive view of the Renaissance but The Art of Memory here shows that there were very strong occult developments that happened during this time, very arcane, even more needlessly complicated and unscientific.
- That mnemonic techniques were used with a spiritual purpose; thinking that what we remember and how we think can bring us closer to the divine.
- That early Puritans were opposed to these techniques (most likely on the ground of them being interwoven with occult traditions), which is probably the cause for them not being utilised in modern education systems.
- The Art of Memory also gave a very insightful example of how knowledge was passed on from the ancients, into the Middle Ages and into the Renaissance. For instance key treatises about memory were attributed to the wrong authors (e.g. to Cicero) which conflated the meaning of certain texts. A very good example of how knowledge deteriorated during the Middle Ages and slowly improved in the Renaissance through better scholarship.

Overall, I would not recommend this book for most. Especially if you are interested to learn about mnemonic techniques to improve your memory. The Art of Memory is interesting from a historical perspective but better practical advise can be found in other sources.