From the reviews that I have seen of this book, I had assumed that it would be about what it's title implies: young heroes of the soviet union. To some degree, it is. But I think overall it is really not, and more of an autobiographical account and family history of a Jewish family in the Soviet Union. For me, though, this did not matter at all and I think it was still very interesting and a very pleasant read.

To me quite new was that Latvia and more specifically Riga was host to a very large Jewish enclave that provided them some refuge from prosecution around Europe. Also that the Soviet Union did not treat their Jewish citizens very well - which is interesting considering that some political forces in the West would often characterise communism as being brought about by Jews.

I also found it quite interesting to read about the live of citizens in the Soviet Union in the latter half of the last century. There really seems to have been a lack of many things, and a society that was very much based on who-knows-who rather than merit. It also seems to have been a particularly unpleasant experience for women, who had to do full time work without the necessary support from society and their husbands alike to do so. One particularly striking example given was that abortions were often used as a form of birth control - given that other means were not easily available.

It really seems that the Russian people were one to endure many hardships - first through the czarist regime, then through the revolution, the second world war, Stalin's regime, and finally mismanagement and scarcity of life essentials. Likewise, of course so do the Jewish people. So this family history really converges on a crossroads of hardship and provides some interesting perspectives of how different individuals in different times deal with challenging situations.
